# Advancement

# Experience

All characters who survive an adventure and return to safety gain experience points (XP) due to any treasure recovered or monsters defeated. Experience points are awarded by the referee (see ***Awarding XP***).

## Prime Requisite Modifiers

Characters with especially low or high scores in their class’ prime requisites receive a bonus or penalty for XP earned (see ***Ability Scores***). These modifiers are applied to the total XP gained by each character following an adventure.

## Level Up

When a character gains enough XP to reach the next experience level, the player should consult the description of the character’s class and note any improvements in saving throws, attack probabilities, spells per day, and other class abilities. If the character’s Hit Dice increases, a new Hit Die of the specified type should be rolled, adding the result to the character’s maximum hit point total.

## Maximum XP in One Session

Characters can advance up to one level in one session. Any additional XP that would take a character two or more levels above their current level is lost, leaving the character at 1 XP below the total for the next level.

# Level Titles

In some campaigns, characters gain the right to bear specific titles as they advance in level. Such titles may be granted by the guilds, colleges, or temples that PCs are associates of. Level titles often vary significantly between campaign worlds, but the following lists may be used as inspiration:

- **Cleric:** Acolyte, Adept, Priest(ess), Vicar, Curate, Elder, Bishop, Lama, Matriarch (Patriarch).
- **Fighter:** Veteran, Warrior, Swordmaster, Hero, Swashbuckler, Myrmidon, Champion, Superhero, Lord (Lady).
- **Magic-user:** Medium, Seer, Conjurer, Magician, Enchanter (Enchantress), Warlock (Witch), Sorcerer (Sorceress), Necromancer, Wizard.

# Wealth

See Wealth.

# Hirelings

See Hirelings.